We trust algorithms to make fair decisions about who gets a job or extra help in school.
So how does an objective machine develop algorithmic bias?
Take a community college, using a model to predict which incoming students need targeted support.
To work, this algorithm first has to learn what success looks like.
It ingests years of historical data, finding patterns in past grades and enrollment.
But there's a hidden flaw in those records. Due to long-standing societal inequities,
marginalized groups often show lower historical success rates in these systems.
The algorithm can't see the societal context behind those numbers.
It just turns that historical inequality into a rigid rule,
equating the historically dominant group with the ideal baseline.
Turning past disparities into mathematical rules for the future
is exactly how algorithmic bias operates.
What happens when this model evaluates a new cohort?
By applying that flawed baseline, the model quietly underestimates Black students.
It incorrectly predicts they are more likely to succeed than they actually are.
As a result, they receive fewer resources than peers with the exact same actual level of need.
And that incoming community college student?
The algorithm quietly locks the gate, denying them support based on historical
disparities they had no part in.